On 2/26/20 9:41 AM, Couch, Sean wrote:
> Also, Carlo would you mind putting into writing the responses we
> discussed to the questions about RBF vs. GP in the little writeup I
> shared from Yeoson and Andrew? I could try to recall your answer
> myself, but that is a game of telephone that would not go well….
>
> Sean

On the general differences in outlook between scattered data approximation
by RBF and Gaussian process modeling, I'd say that the two approaches share
some mathematical commonalities, which are generalized in different directions,
for different purposes:

RBFs generalize (at least) in the direction of considering kernels that are
only "conditionally" positive-definite, in directions constrained by a subspace
of polynomial basis functions, as per p. 1 of Andrew's and Hyoseon's writeup.
The motivation for this is, I believe, to generalize the space of possible
kernels beyond the strictly positive-definite kernels without compromising
solvability of the linear system, so as to gain access to a wider and more
flexible space of approximants.

GP modeling is not strictly about function approximation, but rather about
non-parametric statistical modeling.  The idea is, informally, to place
a "prior" Gaussian distribution on a Hilbert space of functions, and use the rules
of conditional probability to infer transformations of that distribution
consequent on conditioning on sample data.  GPs require that kernels, being
covariances, be strictly non-negative definite, and in this sense are less
general than RBF approximants.  On the other hand, GP modeling generalizes
RBFs in that

(1) Kernels need not be "radial" (i.e. translation-invariant);

(2) Functions may be offset by arbitrary "mean functions" (not just
     finite-order polynomials);

(3) A natural fit quality metric is supplied by the likelihood function,
     which can help step among hyper-parametrized kernels to determine which
     member of a family corresponds to the "best" Hilbert space of functions
     (i.e. which scales, order of differentiability, etc. seem to best match
     the data);

(4) The Bayesian interpretation of "modify prior with data, marginalize latent
     values to obtain marginal likelihood" furnishes a natural interpretation
     for the quadratic regularization term that is often added to the data-fit
     term as an ad-hoc regularizer in standard optimization problems.

Now, as to the specific questions asked by Andrew and Hyoseon in their write-up:

(1) "How did you find $\overline{f}(x_*)$ in (7) and (8) and how accurate are they?"

That term comes from the assumed prior mean function.  The reason for including
a mean function in the model is that the data may not have been mean-subtracted,
and consequently the addition of a mean term helps the covariance term not work
as hard in order to obtain a reasonable approximation.  When the interpolation moves
too far from any training points (as measured by the length scale characteristic of
the kernel) the approximant tends to "sag" back to the prior value.  Using a mean
function adapted to the data means that the approximant will sag to this mean, instead
of to zero.

Typically what is done is to assume the mean "function" is in fact a constant,
and compute the constant by optimizing the likelihood (this can be done
analytically).  So in this case $\overline{f}(x_*)$ is that constant.  This is,
I think, equivalent to an RBF approximant using m=1 (i.e. the constant polynomial)
on p. 1 of the write-up.  As noted in (2) above, there is no necessity that this
should be a polynomial at all, it is merely a convenience to get a bit more
flexibility into the approximant.  I know of no inherent measure of "how accurate"
(or "how much more accurate") this added term is. Such statements
would be data dependent, and probably have to be phrased in terms of convergence
in probability or in mean-square.  Not saying such things aren't known, I just
don't know them myself.

(2) "If the covariance function K is chosen as just a Gaussian function and a zero
mean is assumed, i.e., $\overline{f}(x_*)=0$, in (7), what is the difference between this ap-
proximation and the RBF interpolation?"

None whatsoever, I believe.

I hope that's helpful.

Carlo
